SE-NNNN: Build-Time Constant Values (#1)
artemcm/swift-evolution: proposals/XXXX-build-time-constant-values.md

# Build-Time Constant Values

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](build-time-constant-values.md)
* Authors: [Artem Chikin](https://github.com/artemcm), [Ben Cohen](https://github.com/airspeedswift), [Xi Ge](https://github.com/nkcsgexi)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Implemented**

## Introduction

> A Swift language feature for designating certain values to be knowable at compile-time consisting of an attribute to designate certain properties, and function parameters to have compile-time knowable values. Such information can be used by the compiler to extract build-time program information and to serve as a foundation for richer compile-time features in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Swift language feature for requiring certain values to be knowable at compile-time. This is achieved through an attribute, `@const`, constraining properties and function parameters to have compile-time knowable values. Such information forms a foundation for richer compile-time features in the future, such as extraction and validation of values at compile time.
```

Related forum threads:

* [[Pitch] Compile-Time Constant Values](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-compile-time-constant-values/53606)

## Motivation

Compile-time constant values are values that can be known or computed during compilation and are guaranteed to not change after compilation. Use of such values can have many purposes, from enforcing desirable invariants and safety guarantees to enabling users to express arbitrarily complex compile-time algorithms. 

The first step towards building out support for compile-time constructs in Swift is a basic primitives consisting of an attribute to declare function parameters and properties to require being known at *compile-time*. While this requirement explicitly calls out the compiler as having additional guaranteed information about such declarations, it can be naturally extended into a broader sense of *build-time* known values - with the compiler being able to inform other tools with type-contextual value information. For an example of the latter, see the “Declarative Package Manifest” motivating use-case below.

## Proposed Solution

> The Swift compiler will recognize declarations of properties, local variables, and function parameters declared with a `@const` attribute as having an additional guarantee to be known at compile-time. If a `@const` property or variable is initialized with a runtime value, the compiler will emit an error. Similarly, if a runtime value is passed as an argument to a `@const` function parameter, the compiler will emit an error. Aside from participating in name mangling, the attribute has no runtime effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Swift compiler will recognize declarations of properties, local variables, and function parameters declared with a `@const` attribute as having an additional requirement to be known at compile-time. If a `@const` property or variable is initialized with a runtime value, the compiler will emit an error. Similarly, if a runtime value is passed as an argument to a `@const` function parameter, the compiler will emit an error. Aside from participating in name mangling, the attribute has no runtime effect.
```

### Parameter `@const` attribute

A function parameter can be marked with a `@const`  keyword to indicate that values passed to this parameter at the call-site must be compile-time-known values.

```
func foo(input: @**const** Int) {...}
```

### Supported Types

The requirement that values of `@const` properties and parameters be known at compile-time restricts the allowable types for such declarations. The current scope of the proposal includes:

* Integer and floating-point literals.
* String literals (excluding interpolated strings).
* Enum cases with no associated values.

> * Array literals consisting of integer, floating-point, string literals or enum cases with no associated values.

Reviewer: can probably just say "Array and Dictionary literals consisting of elements in this list" (do we support nested arrays?)

* Dictionary literals consisting of integer, floating-point, string literals or enum cases with no associated values.

> This list may expand in the future to include more literal-value kinds or potential new compile-time valued constructs.

Reviewer: Can probably say "will" expand. Could even give an example of @frozen structs with public members.

### Protocol `@const` property requirement 

A protocol author may require conforming types to default initialize a given property with a compile-time-known value by specifying it as `@const static` in the protocol definition. For example:

```
protocol NeedsConstGreeting {
    @const static let greeting: String
}
```

If a conforming type initializes `greeting` with something other than a compile-time-known value, a compilation error is produced:

```
struct Foo: NeedsConstGreeting {
  // 👍
  static let greeting = "Hello, Foo"
}

struct Bar: NeedsConstGreeting {
  // error: 'greeting' must be initialized with a const value
  static let greeting = "\(Bool.random ? "Hello" : "Goodbye"), Bar"
}
```

## Motivating Example Use-Cases

> ### Declarative Package Manifests that do not require execution

Reviewer: This section heading differs from the other because it cites the example, not the general design goal. Suggest renaming it to "Facilitate Compile-time Extraction of Values".

```
URL(Bool.random() ? "https://valid.url.com" : "invalid url . com")
```

### Guaranteed Optimization Hints

Similarly, ergonomics of numeric intrinsics can benefit from allowing only certain function parameters to be required to be compile-time known. For example, requiring a given numeric operation to specify a `@const` parameter for the rounding mode of an operation as an enum case, while allowing the operands of the operation be runtime values, allowing the compiler to generate more-efficient code. 

## Source compatibility

This is a purely additive change and has no source compatibility impacts.

## Effect on ABI stability and API resilience

The new function parameter attribute is a part of name mangling.

## Effect on SwiftPM packages

There is no impact on SwiftPM packages.

## Future Directions

* Compile-time types - allow types consisting of `const` properties to be treated as compile-time-known values.
* Compile-time expressions - allow expressions that operate on compile-time-known values, from binary operators to control flow.
* Compile-time functions - consisting of expressions operating on compile-time-known values and `const` parameters.

> 

Reviewer: I would add "toolchain support for extracting compile-time values at compile time". Today you can do it using code inspection tools like SourceKit but in future a more structured support for this kind of extraction could be built.

Reviewer: Also we should mention propagation of constants.
